Convai guides (#824)
elevenlabs/elevenlabs-docs: fern/conversational-ai/pages/customization/rag.mdx

---
title: Retrieval-Augmented Generation
subtitle: Enhance your agent with large knowledge bases using RAG.
---

## Overview

> **Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)** enables your agent to access and utilize large knowledge bases during conversations. Instead of loading entire documents into the context window, RAG retrieves only the most relevant information for each user query, allowing your agent to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)** enables your agent to access and use large knowledge bases during conversations. Instead of loading entire documents into the context window, RAG retrieves only the most relevant information for each user query, allowing your agent to:
```

Keep the language simple and avoid terms like "utilize" when a more simple "use" will do.

- Access much larger knowledge bases than would fit in a prompt
- Provide more accurate, knowledge-grounded responses
- Reduce hallucinations by referencing source material
- Scale knowledge without creating multiple specialized agents

> <Info>

Reviewer: Having an Info next to a Warning is odd. Instead just make this a paragraph instead of a callout.

  RAG is ideal for agents that need to reference large documents, technical manuals, or extensive
  knowledge bases that would exceed the context window limits of traditional prompting.
</Info>

> <Warning>RAG adds on slight latency to the response time of your agent, around 500ms.</Warning>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Warning>RAG adds on slight latency to the response time of your agent, around 500ms.</Warning>
```
500ms is pretty huge. Is that per message? Or only when the agent needs to retrieve some info? I would make this less off-putting.

Author: its per-turn. but it will be configurable in the future so that it only fetches when needed

## How RAG works

When RAG is enabled, your agent processes user queries through these steps:

1. **Query Processing**: The user's question is analyzed and reformulated for optimal retrieval

> 2. **Embedding Generation**: The processed query is converted into a vector embedding

Reviewer: That's great, but what is a vector embedding and why should I care?

> 1. **Query Processing**: The user's question is analyzed and reformulated for optimal retrieval
> 2. **Embedding Generation**: The processed query is converted into a vector embedding
> 3. **Retrieval**: The system finds the most semantically similar content from your knowledge base
> 4. **Response Generation**: The agent generates a response using both the conversation context and the retrieved information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Query processing**: The user's question is analyzed and reformulated for optimal retrieval
2. **Embedding generation**: The processed query is converted into a vector embedding
3. **Retrieval**: The system finds the most semantically similar content from your knowledge base
4. **Response generation**: The agent generates a response using both the conversation context and the retrieved information
```

<Note>
  When RAG is enabled, the size of knowledge base items that can be assigned to an agent is
  increased from 300KB to 10MB
</Note>

## Guide

### Prerequisites

- An [ElevenLabs account](https://elevenlabs.io)

> - A configured ElevenLabs Conversational Agent ([create one here](/docs/conversational-ai/quickstart))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A configured ElevenLabs [Conversational Agent](/docs/conversational-ai/quickstart)
```

- At least one document added to your agent's knowledge base

<Steps>
    <Step title="Enable RAG for your agent">
        In your agent's settings, navigate to the **Knowledge Base** section and toggle on the **Use RAG** option.
        
        <Frame background="subtle">
        <img src="/assets/images/conversational-ai/rag-enabled.png" alt="Toggle switch to enable RAG in the agent settings" />
        </Frame>
    </Step>

    <Step title="Configure RAG settings">
    After enabling RAG, you'll see additional configuration options:
    - **Embedding model**: Select the model that will convert text into vector embeddings

>     - **Maximum document chunks**: Set the maximum amount of retrieved content per query

Reviewer: Can we explain what the side effects of modifying these are? e.g. extra latency

Author: added

        - **Prompt**: The document is always included in the system prompt, regardless of relevance, but can also be retrieved by RAG

        <Frame background="subtle">
            <img
                src="/assets/images/conversational-ai/rag-prompt.png"
                alt="Document usage mode options in the knowledge base"
            />
        </Frame>

        <Warning>
            Setting too many documents to "Prompt" mode may exceed context limits. Use this option sparingly
            for critical information.
        </Warning>
    </Step>

    <Step title="Test your RAG-enabled agent">
      After saving your configuration, test your agent by asking questions related to your knowledge base. The agent should now be able to retrieve and reference specific information from your documents.

    </Step>

</Steps>

## API implementation

You can also implement RAG through the [API](/docs/api-reference/knowledge-base/rag-index-status):

<CodeBlocks>
    ```python title="Enable RAG for a document"
    import requests

    # First, index a document for RAG

    document_id = "your-document-id"
    response = requests.post(

>       f"https://api.elevenlabs.io/v1/conversational-ai/knowledge-base/{document_id}/rag-index",

Reviewer: Is there no SDK method for this?

Author: not yet, will add when we regenerate

      headers={"xi-api-key": "your-api-key"},
      json={"model": "e5_mistral_7b_instruct"}
    )

    # Check indexing status
    while True:
      if response.json()["status"] in ["SUCCEEDED", "FAILED"]:
          break
      time.sleep(5) # wait 5 seconds before checking status again
      response = requests.get(
        f"https://api.elevenlabs.io/v1/conversational-ai/knowledge-base/{document_id}/rag-index",
        headers={"xi-api-key": "your-api-key"}

>       )

Author: is not released yet, will add this in a follow up PR once we have new python sdk

    - Consider splitting very large knowledge bases across multiple agents
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Troubleshooting

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Document indexing fails">
    If document indexing fails:

    - Check that the document format is supported (PDF, TXT, DOCX, HTML)
    - Ensure the document isn't corrupted
    - Try re-uploading a simplified version of the document
    - Check that the document size is within limits

  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Agent doesn't retrieve relevant information">
    If your agent isn't finding relevant information:

    - Verify that indexing has completed successfully
    - Try reformulating your questions to be more specific
    - Check if the information exists in your knowledge base
    - Consider adjusting the maximum document chunks setting

  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Slow response times">
    If responses are slow:

    - Reduce the maximum document chunks setting
    - Use more concise documents
    - Consider using a different embedding model
    - Split very large knowledge bases across multiple agents

  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Limitations

> - RAG works best with text-based information and may not effectively retrieve information from images or complex tables
> - Very large documents may take longer to index
> - Response quality depends on both the quality of your knowledge base and the specificity of user queries
> - Some documents may be too large to be included in "Prompt" mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- RAG works best with text-based information and may not effectively retrieve information from images or complex tables.
- Very large documents may take longer to index.
- Response quality depends on both the quality of your knowledge base and the specificity of user queries.
- Some documents may be too large to be included in "Prompt" mode.
```

> - Some documents may be too large to be included in "Prompt" mode

Reviewer: What's the limit?

<Note>
  When RAG is enabled, the size of knowledge base items that can be assigned to an agent is
  increased from 300KB to 10MB
</Note>

## Guide

### Prerequisites

- An [ElevenLabs account](https://elevenlabs.io)
- A configured ElevenLabs [Conversational Agent](/docs/conversational-ai/quickstart)
- At least one document added to your agent's knowledge base

<Steps>
    <Step title="Enable RAG for your agent">
        In your agent's settings, navigate to the **Knowledge Base** section and toggle on the **Use RAG** option.
        
        <Frame background="subtle">
        <img src="/assets/images/conversational-ai/rag-enabled.png" alt="Toggle switch to enable RAG in the agent settings" />
        </Frame>
    </Step>

    <Step title="Configure RAG settings">
    After enabling RAG, you'll see additional configuration options:
    - **Embedding model**: Select the model that will convert text into vector embeddings
    - **Maximum document chunks**: Set the maximum amount of retrieved content per query
    - **Maximum vector distance**: Set the maximum distance between the query and the retrieved chunks

>     These parameters impact latency, however can impact LLM cost which in the future will be passed on to you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    These parameters could impact latency. They also could impact LLM cost which in the future will be passed on to you.
```

      response = requests.get(
        f"https://api.elevenlabs.io/v1/conversational-ai/knowledge-base/{document_id}/rag-index",
        headers={"xi-api-key": "your-api-key"}
      )

    # Then update agent configuration to use RAG

    agent_id = "your-agent-id"
    agent_config = requests.get(
      f"https://api.elevenlabs.io/v1/conversational-ai/agents/{agent_id}",
      headers={"xi-api-key": "your-api-key"}
    ).json()

    # Enable RAG in the agent configuration

    agent_config["agent"]["prompt"]["rag"] = {
        "enabled": True,
        "embedding_model": "e5_mistral_7b_instruct",
        "max_documents_length": 10000
    }

    # Update document usage mode if needed

    for i, doc in enumerate(agent_config["agent"]["prompt"]["knowledge_base"]):
        if doc["id"] == document_id:
            agent_config["agent"]["prompt"]["knowledge_base"][i]["usage_mode"] = "auto"

    # Update the agent configuration

    requests.put(
        f"https://api.elevenlabs.io/v1/conversational-ai/agents/{agent_id}",
        headers={"xi-api-key": "your-api-key"},
        json=agent_config
    )

    ```

```javascript

> const axios = require('axios');

Reviewer: Why axios? Native fetch does the same thing and doesn't require an extra dependency.

Reviewer: Also in our docs we use `import` as the standard instead of `require`.

    - Check that the document size is within limits

  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Agent doesn't retrieve relevant information">
    If your agent isn't finding relevant information:

    - Verify that indexing has completed successfully
    - Try reformulating your questions to be more specific
    - Check if the information exists in your knowledge base
    - Consider adjusting the maximum document chunks setting

  </Accordion>

  <Accordion title="Slow response times">
    If responses are slow:

    - Reduce the maximum document chunks setting
    - Use more concise documents
    - Consider using a different embedding model
    - Split very large knowledge bases across multiple agents

  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Limitations

- RAG works best with text-based information and may not effectively retrieve information from images or complex tables.
- Very large documents may take longer to index.
- Response quality depends on both the quality of your knowledge base and the specificity of user queries.
- Some documents may be too large to be included in "Prompt" mode. The size of extracted text from prompt documents can be 300KB total

> ```

Reviewer: Empty codeblock is empty.
